From Hansel minutes.com. It's Hanselman.
It's a weekly discussion with
web developer and technologists. Scott
Hanselman hosted by Carl Franklin. This
is Lawrence Ryan announcing show number
31 recorded Monday, August 28th, 2006 sport
for Hanselman it's just provided
by COVID Smith tools, makers
of code Smith and extensible
template based code generator for.net
Hansel minutes, listeners get a
hundred dollars off coach Smith
professional with coupon code H
M 100. online@covidsmithtools.com. Support is
also provided by dotnet developers
journal. The world's leading dotnet
developer magazine online at www
dot  dot com. In
this episode, Scott discusses test
driven development. Hi, this is
Carl Franklin and you're listening to
Hansel minutes. I'm here with
Scott once again. Hi Scott,
how are you, sir? I'm
fine. So we got some
email addressing our dynamic languages
show. Yeah, we got a
lot of email about it
actually. And we got some,
some good, some kind of
good, some mediocre. I think
a lot of people took,
took, took us to task
or took umbrage at some
of the assumptions that we
were making about when you
move from a compiler based
model to a test based
model that, you know, before
the compile did a lot
of checking for you. And
now I'm saying that the
testing does a lot of
checking for you, but the
argument that test driven development
saves you lines of code
is kind of a, I
guess it's kind of a
specious argument, I think was
the, yeah, I think that's
the gist of it. Yeah.
And then I think that
you made a really good
point that many people called
out, which was that having
lots and lots of unit
tests and having good tests.
Coverage is a very different
thing from test driven development,
formally test first methodology. Our,
one of our writers who
was email was dead. David Leon,
who thought that if he's
got to go and write
a 168 water tests just
to validate something, then you
know, is that really a
beneficial thing? And I think
he was basically calling me
out on test driven development,
as it relates to dynamic
languages is they're really totally
separate things. I was basically
saying that there's a certain
freedom that a, a dynamic
language offers you, but that
is a totally separate thing
from doing test driven development.
So I figured let's just
do a show on TDD
and, and talk about it.
Okay. So, so right. The,
the general idea of, of
test driven development, like the,
the, the man mantra is
write a test that fails.
So like step one, write
a test and cause it
to fail. Usually it will
fail the stuff that you're
trying to test doesn't exist
yet. You haven't written the
code yet. Right? Exactly. Number
two is fixed the code.
So then you can pass
the test and then number
three, which is often forgotten,
but it's really kind of
the whole point of test
driven development specifically, which is
refactor the code, you know,
refactor, ruthlessly is what people
like to say. Right. And
then step four, rinse repeat,
right? Yeah. So yes, it's
true test driven development. Isn't
necessarily allowing you to write
less code, although from a
design perspective, it can, when,
when you are sitting down
writing code test first, and
this is Greenfield's fresh stuff,
right? When you're writing from
scratch, really test driven development
is allowing you to become
your own client, right? You
are the client of the
code. You're you get to
sit down and say in
a perfect world. If I
were to write this framework,
how would it behave from
the outside? Scott, Scott bellwether
has a really great essay
that we'll post up about
this called write naive tests.
Basically say, this is how
it ought to work, become
your own client. It's a
tiny URL slash H B
Three CDW. And we're reasonably
Using tiny URL today's cause
shrinks or.com Effectively down. Yeah.
Some of that's disappeared, but
we're going to hook up
with that guy and try
to find his database and
getting back up. Right. We'll
figure that out. All of
these links will be up
on the site. So you'll
be able to reference these
at the show site or
at my blog. Okay. So
test driven development at the
pure, the purest sense is
become your own client. Okay.
But remember, step one, write
a test that fails. Step
two, fix the code. Step
three, refactor. One of the
benefits really kind of the
primary benefit of test driven
development is that it lets
you refactor very freely, right?
It gives you a formal
suite of tests that are
lying out there that you
can, you can run against
your code whenever you want.
Now test driven development doesn't
necessarily mean you have to
have a unit testing framework,
right? It doesn't mean you
have to use an unit
or you have to use
team system test. And certainly
in the, in the eighties,
when people were writing test
code in C plus, plus
they were just writing little
test programs or they'd write
their own testing library. They
didn't have a formalized method
early, early on until things
like calm unit and some
of the early, even before
that, the earliest C plus
plus unit testing stuff came
out, but it lets you
refactor freely. And this is
what, what Fowler was talking
about when he wrote in
refactoring. And that's it refactoring.com
is that if you've got
this, this, this netting, that's
protecting you, right? If you
can, you can, you can
climb up the mountain and
do something crazy and someone
will catch you when you
fall. It is those tests
that will catch you. So
it is the ability to
refactor ruthlessly. There's a person
who's got a great essay
on test driven development, where
they say refactor without fear
and a refactor ruthlessly. This
is at a we'll post
this up there. This is
a poor VA. Murata hada
has an essay on test
driven development That said JP
B and refactor ruthlessly, is
it . And this, this
individual says that the coding
cycle is red, green refactor.
That's a really great way
to remember the, the rules
of, of, of test driven
development. So it's really that
ability. So that's the first
benefit that ability to refactor
freely and rip the guts
out of stuff. We recently
refactored some stuff. Patrick Caldwell, my
buddy at work ripped the
complete guts out of a
chunk of code that we
had, but we had 150,
160 unit tests backing that
up. And they were almost,
they were almost a specification,
right? This, these unit tests
read like specification code, right?
So we were able to
yank out the middle part
of that service and replace
it with a much faster
implementation. And the, the test
where our guide, the thing
that was significant is that
when we, when, when the
tests passed, we knew we
were done. Right, right. So
this is one of the
things that the test driven
purists will say, is that
right? The simplest possible code
to let the test pass.
Yeah. Right. And then when
the test passes, you're done,
if you don't feel done,
you know, that there's more
work to be done than
write another test, as opposed
to expand on the code
and the design folks who
say that test driven development
improves your design. It makes
it more, more flexible. It
makes it more extensible. It
makes it easier to maintain.
These are the people who
are refactoring while they're writing
their code, because you shouldn't
be refactoring unless there's something
about the test or something
about that, about a test
that uncovers an aspect of
the design that says, Oh,
this really, this test just
pushed the, just the specification,
just push the application into
a new world, into a
new location. Oh, I see
an opportunity now to refactor.
I will refactor and I'll
see if all my tests
still pass. So like we
did point out before, but
I, I didn't say where
they explicitly asked him, you
sometimes will write a lot
more code in your tests
then in your, then in
your actual code, you'll spend
more time writing tests. Whether
people feel that that is
a good thing or a
bad thing. Some people say
that that's silly, right? Because
when we were talking about
dynamic languages last week, we
were saying that in the
application that my 16 year
old intern wrote, he ended
up writing more code in
the tests than he did
in the code itself. Right.
Number of people said, well,
that's not exactly a step
forward. It really depends. It
depends on how complicated the
application is. Depends on what
the application is meant to
be. I mean, how many
times have you written an
application that you're going to
run once, you know, to
convert some data or doing
some, some other kind of
thing? Oh wow. Absolutely. And
that's, and that might not
be an application you want
to apply test driven development
to at all, but an
application where there's a lot
of, you know, maybe a
small app, but there's a
lot of potential unknown input
or an application that needs
to be very secure. You
want to use a lot
of negative unit tests, really
beat on the thing and
see if it'll stop. The
other thing is that when,
when you're done is really
up to you, some people
use test coverage, right? The,
the of code paths that
have been covered as a,
an, an I'm done metric
they'll use tools like end
cover@endcover.org and the end cover
Explorer. And sometimes they'll tie
all of that stuff together
with things like test-driven dot
net, Jamie candidate test driven.net,
which is at www dot
test-driven dot net. Those tools
will allow you to right
click and visual studio and
say, run tests or right.
Click and say, test with
coverage. And there's one individual
at my work who just
refuses to check anything out.
She me refuses to check
anything in rather to source
control, unless it has a
hundred percent coverage. Now that's
not necessarily reasonable for every
application, but some people say,
you know, if you can
get a 50, 60, 70%
of your code covered, that
means that after every single
build, that chunk of code
is running and arguably, if
you do test driven development
and the test really wags
the code, you won't write
any code that isn't run
by a test because the
tests are driving the code.
So it is possible to
get that kind of, that
kind of test coverage. Do
you use Refactor from developer
express or ReSharper, or, or
both what's your take on
it? I, I really love
refactor from dev express in
particular, I love the kind
of graphical tools that show
you things like psychosomatic complexity
and, and the sort of
the arrows and things that
Mark draws all over the
screen. Yeah. The, the stuff
going on in code rush
and refactor from dev express
is really great at knowing
is this code too complicated?
Yeah. There's a lot of
really cool templates. There's a
where you can actually say
like TF and it'll build
a whole test framework for
you And intelligence, you know,
he's trying to read your
mind basically, and it does
a pretty good job. Totally.
Yeah. Now the jet brains,
the guys that make ReSharper
have a similar, a similar
tool, not exactly like code
rush, but similar, but that
also has a code rush
beat when it comes to
analysis of code kind of
real time compilation and analysis
of code, but they also
have a built in test
runner of their own that
will run unit tests that
you have within your project
that are built in either
end unit or in an
alternative and unit testing framework
called CS unit. And that
is integrated within visual studio
for those of us who
aren't using test team system
tester. And it also allows
inline profiling. So you can
actually click on a test,
say, run this task, debug
this test, or profile it,
using the JetBrains dot trace
profiler. And that's a sweet
profile if you've ever used
dot trace fantastic stuff, which
is interesting. If you think
about profiling, a test remembering
that the test is a
client of the code that
you're actually writing, the code
that you're writing in the
om is being, being wagged
right at the incident wag,
the dog kind of essentially
are the tests that you're
writing. So then why not
use it as an opportunity
to profile sections of the
code that you know, are
going to be really slow.
And I like to, to
look at alternative frameworks because
a lot of people think,
well, it's either a team
system or it's an unit,
but there was also a
for awhile, a kind of
an upstart. It was called
M B unit written by
a guy named Pelley who
had an original article up
on code project. We have
the tiny role for that.
Any URL, six 16 O
w O Z. That's not
zero one six O w
L And Pelly wrote an
article on code project.com about
this potential unit testing framework
that then turned into M
unit it's. I'm not quite
sure I'd like to get
an email from them to
find out if it's abandoned,
where or not. But one
of the things that M
B unit did that end
unit does not, is the
ability to say via attributes,
run this test 10 times,
or do a data-driven test
by pulling data in, from
somewhere, and then do a
unit test. You know, not,
not everything exists in an
unit. There's a lot of
timing and it really precise
performance, counter type timing and
things like CS unit. But
one of the things that's
nice is test-driven dot net
ReSharper will run those kinds
of tests as is. So
you could potentially mix and
match your unit testing frameworks.
There's no reason that you
have to use all of
one unit testing framework, if
another meets your needs. Now,
typically we talk about test
driven development within the context
of Greenfield. You sit down
and you go file new
and you start out from
fresh, but, but not everybody
necessarily has the chance to
do that. Sometimes you need
to write unit tests for
existing code code that may
not be particularly pretty. Now
there's a gentleman named Jay
flowers who has a thing
called J flowers doubler. And
this is a little confusing
I found, but basically it's
a plugin to Lutz, rotors,
reflector, and doubler is a
code generator that lets you
work with legacy code. And
it lets you create a
basically stubs and rappers and
fake objects around existing code.
Cause sometimes you can't test
a chunk of code if
it has a huge number
of dependencies, right? So you
can, you can kind of
break code apart. You can
say, this is a great
type, but I need to
mirror that type with an
interface over here and then
run generators, run, run code
on that. Then, then you
get into mock objects. I
think we'll do a whole,
Yeah, we should. We could
probably do a whole show
on that. Yeah. And actually,
you know, speaking of people
who know a lot about
mock objects, Roy  has
started writing a book On
the art of unit testing.
Wow. And he's got a
separate RSS feed for this
book. Then he's going to
be updating that feed as
he goes through his, the
book writing process. And it's,
it's sure to be a
great book. You've got the
Earl for that. Yeah. That's
tiny URL slash GB nine
five two. Cool. Yeah. Roy
is a, is an agile
practitioner and definitely someone who
knows the difference between a
test driven development and then
just writing a bunch tests.
And now as far as
do I do, I do
test driven development. I have
in the past, I've sat
down from scratch and started
out where I wrote the
test first. And I, and
I'd have to say that
the code did end up
simpler, but let me tell
you, it's hard. It takes,
thought to sit down and
force yourself to do that
because you just want to
go running when you get
into the code code. And
then next thing you know,
you've written a chunk of
code that you have no
tests for. And writing tests
is tedious, frankly, I'm just
saying Coding practices goes against
one of the main reasons
why, you know, we got
into this business in the
first place, which is, you
know, to create quickly. I
mean, we, you know, there's
a certain satisfaction that comes
with, you know, getting your
thoughts into electronic form as
quick as possible, and actually
seeing it run Definitely. But
at the same time, there's
a different feeling. And it's
hard to explain until you
have several hundred or a
thousand unit tests, but there's
a different feeling when you
have a crap load of
unit tests and someone comes
and says, you know, I
think it's a problem in
this section of the code.
And you say, you know,
I'm pretty confident that it's
not, and here's, here's why,
or if someone finds a
bug and you do the
right thing, fix the bug,
write a test to confirm
that you fix the bug.
And then later on, when
you add new features, you
can actually run regression tests
to find out if you
broke the fix to that
bug. I talked before about
a gentleman who had built
in a he'd shipped an
unit with his code. He
has a WinForms application, right?
And the help about you
would actually go run tests.
So if you ended up
calling him for support, he
would say, well, go to
help about and hit run
tests. And he would actually
run the test locally. I
thought that was such a
creative way to really leverage
that code and also find
out whether it was running
different on his machine versus
on the remote. Very cool.
Very, very cool. Totally. Now
test driven, developed development is
starting to have some people
kind of spin off and
say, well, we want you
to do business driven development
or specification, Even development, domain
driven kind of thing. Well,
domain-driven is a little bit
different. We'll talk about that
in a second. That's a
good point, but specification driven
development, they want it to
have a more businesslike language.
So there's a, a project
called N spec, which is
kind of business driven or
what they call behavior driven
development, where it's mostly changing
of the naming of things
like in test driven development,
you Mark something as a
test and you make assertions
with within spec, you would
Mark something as a specification
and you would say things
like specify that this should
equal that or specify that
this object should not be
the same as this object
or that this object should
throw an exception. You know,
it seems kind of weird
to me because all they
really done is change the
terminology. But there's a number
of people who are interested
in this, in this way
of thinking of making the
spec not be a word
document, not be some texts
we talked before about the
notion of a word document,
having no teeth. Yeah. We're
documents, don't break, break builds,
but it seems to me
that a specification description language,
if it happens to be
written in the language that
you're writing your code in,
in this case in C
sharp.net, if a business person
can't really express it, then
it provides minimal benefit. Unless
there's a tool that can
sort of translate between the
two worlds, Right? So then
you go into to generating
your, your unit tests Well,
or generating your spec from
your unit tests. The other
way around, There are some
that think that business, people
should write the test themselves.
And ward Cunningham has this
notion of fit. We've heard
of fit framework for integrated
tests. This is basically a
way to write a test
in HTML, right? So ward
and a, and Jim Shaw
and a bunch of people
who work on this basically,
would you go into word,
you write out your specification
in prose and in HTML
tables you put in, you
know, here's some input, here's
an expected output. And, and
then you would actually have
a test runner that would
look at that word document,
which has now been saved
as HTML. Here's the trick,
right? Looks at that HTML
document looks at the inputs
and the outputs, and this
might be written by a
business person and then run
some, some code harnesses that
you've written yourself and plugs
in those values and sees
if they match what the
spec says. Yeah, well, there's
like a little red flag
going off in my head
like that possibly can't be
expressive enough. Well, you know,
and it really kind of
depends. It depends on if
your application is, has clear
boundaries about inputs and outputs.
Maybe if you're doing financial
calculations or if you're doing
an application that's filling out
alone for people, it just
depends on the number of
inputs. If an application is
a very interactive yeah. Then
you might want to look
at Ruby or some different
web automation tools. Right. Cause
it seems, I mean, as
you get down into the
bowels of an application, you
know, you're talking about things
that, you know, you're using
entities that are just beyond
the understanding of, of a
business person, you know? So
that's a very good point.
That's a view. Yeah. You
bring up a fantastic point
because here's the question then?
Where do you draw the
line of business person know
about this component? Right? So
then there's the difference between
functional testing, right? And unit
testing, like a developer might
still do unit testing and
end unit or something like
that. But the whole service
oriented architecture point of view
is really another person could
call it boundary based programming,
right? Cause all the services
is a component with a
very clear boundary and you
could design a service such
that it would be reasonable
for a business person to,
to describe that. Because if
the business person understands that
a workflow exists a certain
way, there's customer objects and
there's there's invoice objects and
vendors. And when a person
does this, a vendor should
do that, it would, it
could very conceivably be reasonable
for the, the business person
to describe interactions between these
higher level services as they
understand them as business people.
So they're almost writing kind
of an orchestration. Yeah. It's
a really kind of depends,
but you know, fit is,
is an interesting way. I
mean, thinking about HTML tables
as orchestration or as programming,
I mean, fit can be
as simple as someone pushing
the buttons automated in an
automated fashion, on a website,
you can use it in
a, in a, in a
water like fashion. There's also
tools like selenium that allows
someone to write code in
an HTML table using front
page or using word at
the level that a reasonably
technical business person could could
write, but it fit isn't
explicitly set up for, for,
for Joe business. Got it.
Right. But it's just a
different way of thinking about
the level that you might
want to write your, write
your test that, You know,
it always occurs to me
when we talk about the
differences between business oriented people
and programmers is that, you
know, really what we ought
to be doing is breeding
business programmers, you know, programmers
who are fully technical and
capable, but then, you know,
can go and understand the
business process as well. I
mean, nothing takes the place
of somebody with knowledge writing
the code. And it seems
to me that there's a
lot of emphasis placed on,
you know, translating between, you
know, giving business people tools
so that they can get
closer and closer to writing
code without actually having to
write it. You know what
I mean? Totally. Yeah, absolutely.
I think you're right on,
because from my point of
view, what's the, what's the
goal, right? Like if you
read like Eli gold rat's
book, the goal yeah. Software
that does what it's supposed
to do Well in the
book, in the book, the
goal, the goal is make
more money, right? So if
you think about software, the
tools we use to write
software is this thing, whatever
it is that we're doing,
making us more money. Right.
You know, so test driven
development, not necessarily gonna make
you more money, but it
may save you money later
when, you know, when you
don't have bugs. But what
you just did, what you
just said is getting the
business person closer, The code
or the code are closer
to the business one or
the other right. Programmers do
all day. They, they translate
intent into computer instructions. So
a business person says, I
intend the software to do
this and the program or
the only thing the program
is good for is to
express that business person's intent
in a way that is
computerized, right? So if you
merge them two birds with
two and you get business
savvy programmers, which are typically
called micro ISVM, right. You
know, you get like an
Eric sync type who is
a coder and a business
person, then you can get,
do some serious and they've
proven it out in their
company. Right. And you get
people like Mark. Right. Cause
I mean, we all know
that we all know the
downside to programmers who just
do exactly what they're told.
You know, they tend not
to get hired. I mean,
yeah, absolutely. If you can't
be in, in the middle
of something and recognize that
it needs to change. If
the, if the business person
can express the intent in
some format that the programmer
can consume more readily than
a word document, then that
document, that business document has
teeth at Kirlian. It's usually
custom XML documents where our
business person will, will be
able to read XML in
the, in the most basic
sense or possibly use a
tool like InfoPath to express
their intent in a, in
some kind of a domain
specific language fit is an
example of a domain specific
language for expressing functional intent.
You can write these yourself
things like Ruby and Ruby
spec or end spec are
direct ways to move in
that direction. So if the
person can say this meets
the business need, and I
can assert it in a
program in a programmatic way,
then like we've said, in
the past, the number of
non-software artifacts approaches zero, You
think it's a good idea.
Maybe for people on the
beginning process of, of a,
of a project to give
the business people, to write
an application for the business
people to help them express
what they, you know, what
they need to get done
in the code. So that's,
that was more specific to
their domain. Something that's less
off the shelf. Well, yeah,
I think rapid prototyping is
a way of, of commiserating
of getting together with the
business person and saying, did
you mean this right? So
I think, yeah, you're right.
Anything that a programmer can
do to express to the
business person. Yeah. That's what
I meant or, Or tool
to help them express it.
Right. A tool that they
can use, however, their domain
dictates that can generate XML
or can generate C-sharp or
VB net or whatever. Yes.
If it's, it may not
be, it may not be
fit. It may not be
an unit. It may not
be whatever. But if you
could write a format could
be just CSV file. It
could be just the look
like a make file. Some
text file that the business
person could say, I intend
this, you click generate. You
could generate your test. You
could do whatever. I think
the point of all of
this, this discussion of test
driven development is have a
suite of tests. It gives
you that constant feedback that
the thing is still working.
Yeah. Not, this is not
just that it's working at
a technical level, but that
it's still doing the business
that the business person who
pays you is doing. But
also that document, that documentation,
that kind of implicit documentation
that, Oh, it works like
this. The unit test almost
becomes documentation. It can't, it
doesn't go out of date.
It is, it is how
it works. If it passes,
this is how the system,
the system works. If that
looks like what a business
person can understand all the
better, because then the business
person can say, yes, it
does work like this. And
then all of the benefits
of rapid and ruthless refactoring,
the ripping the guts out
of an application is never
a good idea. Unless you
have a whole bunch of
code written in test format
that confirms that you made
it better, you made it
faster, you made it smaller,
you made it more extensible.
You made it, you made
it. Whatever. If I change
the application and test break,
no benefit there at all.
But then also the, the
forcing you to think if
you're writing frameworks, forcing you
to think like a client
of this code. Right? Right.
One of the things that
we didn't do on DAS
blog was think about anyone
other than the Dodge blog
team, using the data access
layer. If we had maybe
done more tests, it would
have looked like a different
layer. It right now it's
become very organic and it's
extended it's and fold it
over on itself. But it
really was meant to be,
it should have been a
public API that was formally
tested and we should have
described it in our tests
as the ideal. And then
the idea would have wagged
the design and not the,
it wouldn't have grown in
such a such an organic
way. Yeah. And then another
thing that I found that
last, last comment about testing
and development is that if
you spend a lot of
time writing tests, rich language
are not a dynamic language
or knocks, you know, strict
compiler language. You're not, if
you write a lot of
tests, you spend less time
debugging. A lot of people
spend time stepping through their
code. And they're just trying
to get their head around.
Does it work right? But
a test is a way
to do an express if
it works right. This test
will pass. Yeah. I like
what you said about, about
thinking like a client. It
gives you that from the
client perspective that is often
missing when you're in the
middle of writing the goo.
Yeah. And then they don't
care about stepping through it.
They just want to know
that it happens and it
happens fast. So with some
of these different unit testing
frameworks, you can go and
say, you know, test this
and does it pass? Does
it go, does it take
half a half a second?
Does it take 10 milliseconds?
Is that within spec? If
not, you know, what are
we going to do about
it? Right. Express your intent.
Assert your assumptions. Anytime you
say this application must do
this. Anytime a business person
has ever said it should
behave like this. Write a
test. Very good. Cool. Scott,
that's a show. Yeah, let's
do it. We'll do it
one on mock objects soon.
That's a great topic we
could go on and on.
Absolutely. Alright. And until then,
we'll see you next week
on Hansel minutes.